[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Last week, we introduced you to Coach Ray Adkins, who long before he coached the down of football, was involved in far more serious battles, like World War II's Battle of Okinawa, known as Operation Iceberg, near War's End in the Pacific Theater.
Ray Adkins told of the death and other horrors of war that he witnessed.
After the bomb was dropped and the Japanese surrendered aboard the USS Missouri in August of 1945, the occupation began and Ray Adkins unit was sent to China, where the fighting continued and some politics got in the way too.
And then there's 38 years coaching high school football in Texas, the last 23 for the Gregory Portland Wildcats
where he coached his son Marty, who would lead Darryl Royall's Longhorns in the mid-70s.
And today, we will save plenty of time for Ray to brag about his grandchildren and his grandson, Drew Brees, quarterback of the New Orleans Saints.
Welcome Coach Ray Adkins back to Veterans of the Valley.
Ray, it's a pleasure to have you back again.
We want to continue with your service in World War II.
After the bombs were dropped in August of 1945, despite the heavy casualties that your unit took, you were assigned to occupational duty in China.
I want you to talk about that, what that involved.
I know that you couldn't go ashore because of the mine, so you actually had to offload the fishing boats, right, to get onshore to China.
Right.
They call them Chinese junkies.
And they haul coal in there because there was some coal in the bottom when we got in there.
Probably about 30 or 40 of us in one of those boats.
And it was a little town called Tsingtao, right on the border of China.
Tsingtao and Tsingwongtao, and that was another one.
But we kind of rendezvoused there, and then we got on a train, and it was...
Kind of like a military train, really.
The tracks wasn't any wider than three feet.
But anyway, it was like a boxcar.
Right.
And you could see out.
And so they filled up the boxcars with us.
And we traveled several hours.
And then we got to Tientsin, China.
And Tientsin, China at that time was about three million population.
Wow.
And we were sent there to tell the Japanese or get them to understand that the war was over.
because they didn't have any way of knowing that the war was over.
And also to repatriate the Japs back to Sasabu, Japan.
So when we got there, I can remember two or three instances, but one night we were in this school.
and they're in China and in Tientsin.
And we heard these here clicking them, you know, down.
Boy, those Japanese had them boots on and they were coming down the hallway.
And we all slid in this room because we knew they, you know, I mean, they might open fire on us any time.
And they did.
And of course, we had some more Marines killed there and some more Japanese killed there.
But the old British barracks is where we had our compound.
And it had about 12 foot high and it was about, I'd say two and a half feet thick with big high rocks up there and then that wire on the top and big iron gates at the opening.
But I spent probably about four to five months there.
And so while we were there, of course, there's some of the things it's too hard to tell.
I'll tell you.
Yeah.
Anyway, I like to tell this story because I didn't have it before.
Hugh Tao and I decided that we wanted to go to church.
And we hadn't been out of the compound much, but you had to be careful because these rickshaw men sometimes worked for some of these people that wanted to rob you.
And they would take you because you didn't know how to get back.
You know, maybe two miles down into Tientsin.
And they had different compounds, they called them, the British and the White Russian and every different nationality, the Indians and everything.
I mean, they had different compounds for each one.
And you could tell where each one of them lived because they had different lawns, different houses, and everything like that.
But we got down there and we went to that church.
And it was huge.
And so it really stayed in my mind ever since.
Anyway, we went in there.
Of course, they had all different languages, but they sang songs in different languages, but they all had the same tune.
And we were sitting behind these two good-looking girls about halfway up there.
And we knew they couldn't understand us, but in the end, I'll tell you about that.
But anyway, up here on this stage, they had three...
I was wondering how they were going to preach to everybody you know how they were going to talk. So they had these uh three pretty good sized houses well I'd say about four I mean about eight by tens and uh so they opened up this first house and uh they didn't find Jesus anywhere the pictures or nothing or the Bible
And they went back and they tore the house all the way down to show everybody in the audience, probably about 2,000 people there.
And so they found Jesus, dusty and all that, the Bible and everything, in the very back of the house.
So the next house, that showed where these people kept Jesus in their hearts.
And then they got the next one and they found it about middle way.
So, you know, they were kind of iffy, you know, but they had it.
And then the third house, they found him right at the, when he opened the front door, there in that house, there was the Bible, and there was a picture of Jesus and everything.
So what their theme was is, where do you keep Jesus in your heart?
Or, you know, in your house?
And then we walked outside, and these two girls that were sitting in front of us, and I did, I corresponded with them a little bit after that.
They were from India.
And I guarantee you their daddy must have been seven foot tall.
And they're those that wears all that stuff around their head and everywhere.
But he shook hands with me and his old hand was twice as big as mine.
But these girls could speak English.
And so could their parents.
Right.
Anyway, it kind of made us feel like, you know, we've been talking about all this stuff, and they've been listening to it.
But that was it.
And then when we got back, and then I'll skip on down it, when we kind of helped explain why we had kill or be killed one-way ticket, why that was good.
Well, Hugh Tao, after about four months there, he came and told me, he said, Ray, I'm about ready to be, I got my orders to be shipped back home, back to the States.
And I thought, he said, do you have yours?
I said, no.
But I knew he had been in longer than I had.
You know, I told you he was in the Aleutian Islands before he met up with me.
And so, but during that two weeks, then about two weeks later, I got mine.
But during that two weeks, I almost cracked up.
You know, I mean, you're worried about, you know, because we're still getting guys killed.
And still, you know, I mean, things were happening and you kind of tiptoed.
You didn't really
You know, you're always holding back, so to speak.
And then I kind of put that after I started coaching, I really realized that, you know, if you're a player, if you're a football player and you're worried about getting hurt, you ain't worth a damn.
And if you're a soldier or a fighter and you're worried about getting killed, you know, in a war, you're not much soldier.
And so it really dawned on me then, that's what it did right at the end,
And so I really, I think being in the Marines was a great lesson for me.
And certainly we're going to talk about how it influenced you in your football coaching.
I talked in the intro about how politics got in the way a little bit.
And what I was referring to is that you had told me about how things got a little bit testy with the Russians during this occupation, because the Russians, who of course were our allies during World War II,
they were there, U.S.
soldiers were there to repatriate the Japanese and to send them back home.
The Russians were not necessarily there for the same reason.
When they would find the Japanese, a lot of times they would send them to Siberia, I guess, to be laborers for the Russians.
And so you and the Russians were sort of on opposite sides of what to do with these Japanese, and it got a little testy there at times, right?
Absolutely.
I'd like to tell one more story that probably, while this was going on,
The Russians wanted those Japanese, but there was another big compound, and when we'd take these Japs in, you know, when you'd find them and get them, we would take their guns away from them.
And we had a pile of guns that was up 12 feet high, you know, in this compound.
And we had these Japanese in that compound.
And we would take them in these big old LSTs, you know, that the ramps would drop down.
We'd take them, and that's where we'd take them in.
But the Russians, they started taking everybody that had, you know, if they had both arms and both legs, they took them into Siberia to work until they died.
But this, what happened was up in Peking, and now they call it Beijing, but Peking then, and our officers, we,
clashed with you know pretty much clashed some with the Russians because the Russians didn't with they wouldn't let us you know do what we went there to do, and that's repatriate the Japs back to Japan. Right. And so they really and by and large but they broke what happened one night they bombed this or blasted this compound and so we had to let the Japanese have their guns back
And so they took us out in a truck.
Can you mind you there?
I told you three million population would be kind of like Houston.
And they took us out and dropped us off with two Japanese and one Marine about ever, you know, and gave our guns back.
Here we are with the people we've been fighting against.
You're standing shoulder to shoulder.
Now they're with us, more or less fighting against the Russians.
I knew, and when I got back, I told everybody,
that Russia is who we're going to have problems with.
And one day, I'm saying it right now, our problems are going to be with China or Russia.
Right.
Or both.
So you foresaw the Cold War even back then.
And that must have been strange.
We want to get on to football.
And you returned to the US.
You were discharged.
You enrolled at Southwest Texas in San Marcos.
That's where you met, Virginia.
You played football.
You told me one story.
You played with a lot of guys who had returned from the war.
Yes.
And you were playing against some teams of kids that were just coming out of high school who were just 18-year-old kids, and it was pretty much no contest, right?
That's right.
Well, I felt really sorry in a way because during my time there, see, a lot of these men that was in the war, and surprisingly, there was a lot of Marines there.
Of course, our coaches, some of them, you know, we had five coaches that came back and had been in the war.
And...
One of them is really, probably everybody would remember him as Milton Jowers.
And he was a tough, and he actually stayed in the Bobcat Hall with us, you know, where the athletes stayed.
Right.
He lived there.
But it was, actually, I went there.
When I got home from San Diego, California, and got back home, within a week, my coaches had rounded me up.
Mm-hmm.
And one of them named Bob Short, which went to Southwest Texas, he wanted me to go down and I had grown quite a bit.
I didn't weigh but about 140 pounds in high school, but now I weighed 200.
So they wanted me to go down there and see if I could give scholarship.
I was working for the REA.
I got a job with the REA there, and that's when they first started it, working for 40 cents an hour.
But anyway, I went down and I worked out.
There was only 33 boys got scholarships.
We had to do jobs around the school, sweeping out and mopping up dressing rooms and everything.
Anyway, that's my junior year, I met Virginia.
Right.
But I got a scholarship in football and track, which was good.
I want to get you on the coaching road.
Your first coaching job was just down the road from Bryan College Station in Rosebud as an assistant coach, right?
That's right.
And then sort of take us through just where were your stops after Rosebud?
I know you were at Lomita, you were at Goldthwait, Freer.
Where else before you got to Gregory Portland?
What's the order of things here?
Where I went was, I was at, my first job was at Rosebud as assistant coach in 1950.
Okay.
And then in 1951, I went to Lomita as head coach.
Head coach for $2,700 a year.
That's right.
Plus $300 for coaching.
Okay.
Now, then we played Goldthwait, which had been
UIL had been, they'd been suspended or kicked out of the UIL for a while before I ever got there, but they didn't have any equipment or anything.
And so, but I decided that if I, I wanted to find out for sure if I would, if I could, you know, if I was in the right profession.
Right.
So I went to Goathewaite and the coaching school that year, they said, oh, Adkins, why would you want to go to a coach's graveyard?
And, uh,
I told them, I wanted to find out if I can really build a program.
So we went there and we stayed there for three years and we did pretty well.
We only got beat the second two years I was there, three.
We actually did go to the state in the girls.
I coached everything.
So we went to the state in girls' basketball.
You even toted the cheerleaders around, right?
Yeah.
Actually, a lot of the kids today wouldn't know, but we had leather headgears in high school.
You could almost fold them up and put it in your hip pocket, kind of like a pair of gloves.
And now they've got all this thing.
It's really changed.
And when you got tackled, you fell on grass burrs, right?
Yeah, they used our field in the summer as a rodeo ground.
I tell you, solid grass burrs.
We had this big rolling machine they fixed and we tied toe sacks or burlap bags on it and would pull that and all them grass burrs would get in there and then we'd cut it off and put them in a pile there and burn them.
And then we did that and got a lot of the grass birds out.
But I felt sorry.
Those old boys had places on them.
But go back to Goldthwaite, we were there.
And actually, they won the state championship right after I left.
And we'd still be there if they could have paid anything.
But I knew if I stayed in that profession, because by now, we had not only Virginia, we had three children.
And we had Mina and Laura Sue and Marty.
Right.
So we started, either had to go north or south to get a little more money.
So we went to Tidehaven, which is down close to Bay City, between Bay City and Palacios.
And we stayed there, and then we went to Freer in 1960.
We stayed there five years, and we only lost one district game in five years there.
And then we went to Gregory Portland.
And we stayed there 23 years and we thought, well, you know, we'll go there because they didn't have anything either.
So I went to two schools where they had never won anything to speak of.
Right, right.
And so I was real happy that we went there because my superintendent, Mr. W.C.
Andrews, which I owe a lot because he gave me the chance to come and be there.
And he enjoyed going and making arrangements for these playoff games.
Right.
We had a great time.
At Gregory Portland, 23 years there.
3A state finals in 1971.
You won 302 games, I think, in your entire coaching career.
200 and something of those at Gregory Portland.
And one of your quarterbacks in those 23 years was your son Marty.
You had to be very proud to have coached your son because he went on to a great college career at the University of Texas.
You know, Virginia and I are so proud of him, and we're out of all of our children.
Sure, of course.
You know, Marty was, you know, he grew up, he was little and small, but he developed and he started working, and he was a kid that he wanted to do.
You had to be really careful.
In fact, he taught me a lot in my coaching.
Because I saw that if I, you know, a lot of coaches think they have to do something or tell a kid something or they're not doing their job.
Well, I found out, don't tell a kid anything unless you know for a fact it's going to help him.
Because Marty was the type of kid, and we'll just take the shot put, for instance, and if you told him anything, you know, I mean, he was already putting the shot out there 60 feet, you know, and he won the game.
relays in Austin one year.
We went to the Astrodome track meets and we went to big track meets.
And so he
but he did he was a good shot putter and a good discus thrower and he's a good football player and he's a pretty good basketball player and uh you know he he actually was a real good golfer yeah and uh but I told him you haven't got time for that son you gotta play football. But he was you know it's not you know. Sometimes a dad and a you know and his son you know doesn't work out, but Marty was
he was good enough and I kind of put the squeeze on him and the parents from the other boys and the boys ratted around Marty and wanted, you know, they were
Telling me, hey, put Marty in, you know, whenever I didn't have him in.
He finished at Texas in 1975, the year before Coach Royall retired.
And he was really, I guess, Texas' last great wishbone quarterback, an All-American quarterback in the wishbone offense, which was tough to do to become an All-American.
So I know that you were very proud of that.
You spoke of your other children.
Yes, we have one right now.
It's in med school.
Right.
And he, his second year, and that's Ryan Riyahi.
That's our youngest daughter's boy.
Right.
He's probably six, three or four, and he's built like old Schwarzenegger.
He's very well.
And then we have our son Marty's got the two girls, Angela and Tara.
Right.
And then our other...
Our other, Mina, our oldest daughter, had two boys, and one of them is Drew Brees, and the other one is Reed Brees.
And Reed played in the College World Series.
He got a scholarship at Baylor in baseball.
He played in the College World Series his senior year in Omaha.
And so we're real proud of our kids, and they've all done well.
Indeed.
Mina, you and Virginia, tragically, and Drew, lost her in August of 2009, just recently.
But obviously, your grandson, Drew Brees, went to Westlake High School in Austin, won a state championship there his senior year.
They went 16-0, a perfect season.
And...
Didn't get recruited by Texas or Texas A&M, and I'm sure that both the head coaches at the time, Coach McEvick and Coach Slocum, were sorry about that, but he went on to Purdue, and now he's the quarterback of the New Orleans Saints.
Talk about, obviously, how proud you are of the success that he's had, not only on the field with the New Orleans Saints, but the things he's done off the field with his foundation, helping the recovery effort in New Orleans.
I know you're very proud of this young man.
Yes.
He actually started this when he was still in Purdue.
And he's got a street named after him in Purdue, Breezeway, while he was still there, which was great.
But the biggest thing that Virginia and I...
or most proud of our kids for is their generosity and helpfulness to others.
Drew, he has this one where he has a dream, you know, a dream thing.
And so these little kids that's handicapped or can't do much, they've sent in, you know, and said they wanted to go fishing with him.
Right.
So he'd take them.
That was their dream.
They wanted to go fishing.
So he'd take them fishing.
But to end up,
We were on the elevator going up into the Superdome, one of the games.
I believe it was Green Bay.
And these three nuns were on the elevator.
And so they were talking about Drew.
And I told him, I said, I'm the grandfather, and this is their grandmother.
So they said, you know what?
We don't know anything about football.
Mm-hmm.
But we know one thing, we're so proud of Drew for what he does for this, you know, for the community of New Orleans.
Right, right.
We're running some pictures here as you talk, and we can look at those from your football career.
That first one was you at Gregory of Portland, coaching Marty Adkins, your son.
This was signing day when Marty signed with the University of Texas.
That was back in the day when the head coach could actually be in the picture.
And there's Marty with a picture that was signed by Coach Royall.
Now we can slow down.
Tell us about, this picture was taken when Marty was, I guess, inducted into the Hall of Honor at Texas.
Is that right?
Tommy Ingrams is on his right, and he's about 6'7".
He was a tight end when they were there, and also his roommate.
And yes, Marty got the Hall of Honor, University of Texas Hall of Honor award that night.
And so, you know, Coach Royall there between Marty and I. And, you know, he's...
He's always been, you know, a good friend of all of our family.
Indeed.
Let's move on.
Now, this picture was just taken recently at Coach Royall's home.
Is that right?
That's right.
Coach Royall doesn't live too far from where Marty does now in Austin, out on Bee Cave Road, going out north of Austin.
Right.
And so Marty had been telling me that he had been taking Coach Royall out to
golf courses and they would ride around in golf carts. Coach Royall was always interested in golf. Oh sure. And Marty is a is a good golfer and he you know they have a lot in common there and then of course he played for Coach Royall and and uh it is they we we went over to his house and talked to he and his wife and uh and marty's actually taking him out to his ranch yeah and yeah you know right around chirokee
Let's move on to... Now, I want to mention this.
Just this fall, not too long ago, September 25th, 2009, as that shows, this is from the program at Gregory Portland where their football stadium was renamed Ray Adkins Wildcat Stadium.
And you must have been very, very proud of that because just about all of your family was able to be there for that, right?
I'm proud of that for my whole family.
I think that
If it hadn't been for the whole family, and Virginia in particular, you know, and of course Marty, all the children, you know, we supported each other and we needed each other.
And it turned out, I thought it was great.
And this is the whole family.
This is our family except for Tara and her husband.
And she's since that, she's had a great granddaughter.
Now, these are two pictures that I put together.
I thought these were great pictures of you and your grandson, Drew Brees.
And he was, I think we just, you told us that he actually, this was on a Friday night, he actually had a game in Buffalo?
Buffalo Bills, they played.
Two days later, on Sunday.
But they were able to fly him down to Corpus Christi, get in the car, come out to the stadium to be with you that night.
And then they flew him back to catch the team playing the next day to go to Buffalo and then beat Buffalo on Sunday.
Right.
That was a heck of a trip for him, but I knew he was glad to be there.
I was so glad they won the game because I didn't want those kids.
You didn't want to be blamed for that.
There's you in the middle and with Drew on the left as we're looking at the picture and his uncle, Drew.
Marty Adkins on the right.
Now, here's an official photograph of your grandson, autographed to you.
Yes.
Drew, he's given us a football.
When he went this past year, he had the Pro Bowl.
He had all of his team, and they won, but he had all of his team to sign the football, and you probably saw it there on the dresser.
He put it in a case and sent it to us and everything.
This is you in Virginia.
It's a marvelous picture, and you all have been married 60 years.
This lady here is absolutely a saint.
She helps everybody.
She never stops working.
Of course, that's the German in her.
Her name was Schultz.
Exactly.
And I always said I was going to marry a Swede or a German or a Bohemian.
And the reason that you all are in the Brazos Valley now, as a matter of fact, is because she is from New Baden.
That's right.
And so that's why you all are here right now.
Most of my family had passed away or my parents and everything.
And I had not many relatives still left around Brady.
Right.
So, you know, we bought a piece of land there while we were coaching at Freer.
And that's where we are today.
We built a nice log house.
And it's really, for 21 years, we've been there now.
Indeed.
We're out of time.
We could talk forever and ever, but we're out of time.
But thank you for your service, and thank you very much for being here, Coach Adkins.
Ray and Virginia Adkins met at Southwest Texas State after the war, and they have been married more than 60 years now.
Her family, like we said, is from New Baden, and it's near there in Robertson County where they are retired on their ranch.
We salute Coach Ray Adkins for not only his service on the battlefield in World War II, but for his passion of teaching young men life lessons of winning and losing that can only come from the battlefields of Texas high school football.
For Coach Ray Adkins, I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
Tom, you did a
[Music.]